adding token graph docs (#9499)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _analyzers/token-graph.md

---
layout: default

> title: Token Graph

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Token graphs
```

> nav_order: 150

Reviewer: Changed title to match H1 and usage in following content.

---

# Token graphs

> Token graphs represent how tokens relate to each other during text analysis, especially when dealing with multi-word synonyms or compound words. They are important for accurate query matching and phrase expansion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Token graphs show how tokens relate to each other during text analysis, particularly when handling multi-word synonyms or compound words. They help ensure accurate query matching and phrase expansion.
```

> Each token is assigned the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each token is assigned the following metadata:
```

> - `position` – location where the token appears in the text

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `position` – The location of the token in the text
```

> - `positionLength` – how many positions the token spans (used in multi-word expressions)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `positionLength` – How many positions the token spans (used in multi-word expressions)
```

> Token graphs use this information to build a graph structure of token relationships, which is later used during query parsing. Graph-aware token filters such [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/) and [`word_delimiter_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/word-delimiter-graph/) enable you to match phrases more accurately.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Token graphs use this information to build a graph structure of token relationships, which is later used during query parsing. Graph-aware token filters, such as [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/) and [`word_delimiter_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/word-delimiter-graph/), enable you to match phrases more accurately.
```

> Following diagram demonstrates the relationship between `position` and `positionLength` when using [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/). "NYC" token is assigned `position` of `0` and `positionLength` of `3`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following diagram demonstrates the relationship between `position` and `positionLength` when using [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/). The "NYC" token is assigned a `position` of `0` and a `positionLength` of `3`.
```

> The following diagram demonstrates the relationship between `position` and `positionLength` when using [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/). The "NYC" token is assigned a `position` of `0` and a `positionLength` of `3`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following diagram depicts the relationship between `position` and `positionLength` when using [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/). The "NYC" token is assigned a `position` of `0` and a `positionLength` of `3`.
```

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/nyc-token-graph.png" alt="token graph" width="700">

> ## Token graphs during indexing and querying

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using token graphs during indexing and querying
```

At index time, `positionLength` is ignored and token graphs are not used.

> At query time, token graphs are used by queries such as:

Reviewer 2: Are these the only query types that use token graphs? If so, we should say "the following queries" instead of "such as".

Author: no, there are additional ways the token graphs can be used, like multi_match and match_phrase_prefix. I'll re fraise this slightly now

> During query execution, various query types can leverage token graphs, with the most frequently used being:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During query execution, various query types can leverage token graphs, with the following being the most frequently used:
```

> - [match]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/full-text/match/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`match`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/full-text/match/)
```

> - [match_phrase]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/full-text/match-phrase/)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [`match_phrase`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/full-text/match-phrase/)
```

> ## Example: Synonym vs synonym_graph

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Example: Synonym compared to synonym graph
```

> To better understand the difference between graph-aware token filters and standard token filters, you can use the following steps to compare [`synonym`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym/) token filter with [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/) token filter:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To better understand the difference between graph-aware token filters and standard token filters, you can use the following steps to compare the [`synonym`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym/) token filter with the [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/) token filter:
```

> 1. Create index with [`synonym`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym/) token filter (not graph-aware)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create an index with a [`synonym`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym/) token filter (not graph-aware):
```

> 1. Create an index with a [`synonym`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym/) token filter (not graph-aware):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create an index with a [`synonym`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym/) token filter (not graph aware):
```

    ```json
    PUT /synonym_index
    {
      "settings": {
        "analysis": {
          "filter": {
            "my_synonyms": {
              "type": "synonym",
              "synonyms": ["ssd => solid state drive"]
            }
          },
          "analyzer": {
            "my_analyzer": {
              "tokenizer": "standard",
              "filter": ["lowercase", "my_synonyms"]
            }
          }
        }
      },
      "mappings": {
        "properties": {
          "content": {
            "type": "text",
            "analyzer": "my_analyzer"
          }
        }
      }
    }
    ```
    {% include copy-curl.html %}

> 2. Create index with [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/) token filter (graph-aware)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Create an index with a [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/) token filter (graph-aware):
```

> 2. Create an index with a [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/) token filter (graph-aware):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Create an index with a [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/) token filter (graph aware):
```

    ```json
    PUT /synonym_graph_index
    {
      "settings": {
        "analysis": {
          "filter": {
            "my_synonyms": {
              "type": "synonym_graph",
              "synonyms": ["ssd => solid state drive"]
            }
          },
          "analyzer": {
            "my_analyzer": {
              "tokenizer": "standard",
              "filter": ["lowercase", "my_synonyms"]
            }
          }
        }
      },
      "mappings": {
        "properties": {
          "content": {
            "type": "text",
            "analyzer": "my_analyzer"
          }
        }
      }
    }
    ```
    {% include copy-curl.html %}

> 3. Create the same document in each index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Create the same document in each index:
```

    ```json
    PUT /synonym_index/_doc/1
    { "content": "ssd is critical" }
    ```
    {% include copy-curl.html %}
    
    ```json
    PUT /synonym_graph_index/_doc/1
    { "content": "ssd is critical" }
    ```
    {% include copy-curl.html %}

> 4. Search the non graph-aware index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Search the non graph-aware index:
```

> 4. Search the non graph-aware index:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Search the non-graph-aware index:
```

    ```json
    POST /synonym_index/_search
    {
      "query": {
        "match_phrase": {
          "content": "solid state drive is critical"
        }
      }
    }
    ```
    {% include copy-curl.html %}
  

>     Expected result (no hits):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The response contains no hits:
```

    
    ```json
    {
      "took": 13,
      "timed_out": false,
      "_shards": {
        "total": 1,
        "successful": 1,
        "skipped": 0,
        "failed": 0
      },
      "hits": {
        "total": {
          "value": 0,
          "relation": "eq"
        },
        "max_score": null,
        "hits": []
      }
    }
    ```

> 5. Search the graph-aware index

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Search the graph-aware index:
```

    ```json
    POST /synonym_graph_index/_search
    {
      "query": {
        "match_phrase": {
          "content": "solid state drive is critical"
        }
      }
    }
    ```
    {% include copy-curl.html %}
    

>     Expected result (1 hit): 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The response contains one hit: 
```

    
    ```json
    {
      "took": 9,
      "timed_out": false,
      "_shards": {
        "total": 1,
        "successful": 1,
        "skipped": 0,
        "failed": 0
      },
      "hits": {
        "total": {
          "value": 1,
          "relation": "eq"
        },
        "max_score": 1.4384103,
        "hits": [
          {
            "_index": "synonym_graph_index",
            "_id": "1",
            "_score": 1.4384103,
            "_source": {
              "content": "ssd is critical"
            }
          }
        ]
      }
    }
    ```

> The reason there is a hit using graph-aware token filter is because during the [`match_phrase`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/full-text/match-phrase/) query additional subquery is generated using the token graph. Following diagram is demonstrating the token graph created using the graph-aware token filter:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A hit occurs when using the graph-aware token filter because during the [`match_phrase`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/full-text/match-phrase/) query, an additional subquery is generated using the token graph. The following diagram illustrates the token graph created by the graph-aware token filter.
```

1. Create index with [`synonym`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym/) token filter (not graph-aware)

    ```json
    PUT /synonym_index
    {
      "settings": {
        "analysis": {
          "filter": {
            "my_synonyms": {
              "type": "synonym",
              "synonyms": ["ssd => solid state drive"]
            }
          },
          "analyzer": {
            "my_analyzer": {
              "tokenizer": "standard",
              "filter": ["lowercase", "my_synonyms"]
            }
          }
        }
      },
      "mappings": {
        "properties": {
          "content": {
            "type": "text",
            "analyzer": "my_analyzer"
          }
        }
      }
    }
    ```
    {% include copy-curl.html %}

2. Create index with [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/) token filter (graph-aware)

    ```json

>     curl -X PUT "https://localhost:9200/synonym_graph_index" -u admin:admin -k -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d'

Reviewer 3: Lets use consistent format in the sample commands.  

```
PUT /synonym_graph_index
  {
      "settings": {
        "analysis": {
          "filter": {
            "my_synonyms": {
              "type": "synonym_graph",
              "synonyms": ["ssd => solid state drive"]
            }
          },
          "analyzer": {
            "my_analyzer": {
              "tokenizer": "standard",
              "filter": ["lowercase", "my_synonyms"]
            }
          }
        }
      },
      "mappings": {
        "properties": {
          "content": {
            "type": "text",
            "analyzer": "my_analyzer"
          }
        }
      }
    }
```

Author: @udabhas apologies for this, Fanit did address this with me after this was submitted, But I never went back to change it. Thats all changed now and all future PRs are now submitted without the curl command and parameters.

    {
      "settings": {
        "analysis": {
          "filter": {
            "my_synonyms": {
              "type": "synonym_graph",
              "synonyms": ["ssd => solid state drive"]
            }
          },
          "analyzer": {
            "my_analyzer": {
              "tokenizer": "standard",
              "filter": ["lowercase", "my_synonyms"]
            }
          }
        }
      },
      "mappings": {
        "properties": {
          "content": {
            "type": "text",
            "analyzer": "my_analyzer"
          }
        }
      }
    }
    '
    ```
    {% include copy-curl.html %}

3. Create the same document in each index

    ```json
    curl -X POST "https://localhost:9200/synonym_index/_doc/1" -u admin:admin -k -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '
    { "content": "ssd is critical" }'
    ```
    {% include copy-curl.html %}
    
    ```json
    curl -X POST "https://localhost:9200/synonym_graph_index/_doc/1" -u admin:admin -k -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '
    { "content": "ssd is critical" }'
    ```
    {% include copy-curl.html %}

4. Search the non graph-aware index

    ```json

>     curl -X POST "https://localhost:9200/synonym_index/_search" -u admin:admin -k -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d '

Reviewer 3: Here search query is incorrect as we are not checking anything related to ssd. Correct content to search `solid state drive` 

Query Request

```
POST /synonym_index/_search
{
      "query": {
        "match_phrase": {
          "content": "solid state drive is critical"
        }
      }
    }
```

Response
```
{
    "took": 10,
    "timed_out": false,
    "_shards": {
        "total": 1,
        "successful": 1,
        "skipped": 0,
        "failed": 0
    },
    "hits": {
        "total": {
            "value": 0,
            "relation": "eq"
        },
        "max_score": null,
        "hits": []
    }
} %
```

Following diagram demonstrates the relationship between `position` and `positionLength` when using [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/). "NYC" token is assigned `position` of `0` and `positionLength` of `3`.

<img src="{{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/images/nyc-token-graph.png" alt="token graph" width="700">

## Token graphs during indexing and querying

At index time, `positionLength` is ignored and token graphs are not used.

At query time, token graphs are used by queries such as:

- [match]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/full-text/match/)
- [match_phrase]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/query-dsl/full-text/match-phrase/)

## Example: Synonym vs synonym_graph

To better understand the difference between graph-aware token filters and standard token filters, you can use the following steps to compare [`synonym`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym/) token filter with [`synonym_graph`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym-graph/) token filter:

1. Create index with [`synonym`]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/analyzers/token-filters/synonym/) token filter (not graph-aware)

    ```json

>     curl -X PUT "https://localhost:9200/synonym_index" -u admin:admin -k -H 'Content-Type: application/json' -d'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    PUT /synonym_index
```

    {
      "settings": {
        "analysis": {
          "filter": {
            "my_synonyms": {
              "type": "synonym",
              "synonyms": ["ssd => solid state drive"]
            }
          },
          "analyzer": {
            "my_analyzer": {
              "tokenizer": "standard",
              "filter": ["lowercase", "my_synonyms"]
            }
          }
        }
      },
      "mappings": {
        "properties": {
          "content": {
            "type": "text",
            "analyzer": "my_analyzer"
          }
        }
      }
    }

>     '

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
